---
page_type: guide
title: What is accessibility
author: robdodson
web_lighthouse: N/A
wf_blink_components: Blink>Accessibility
---

# What is accessibility

When a site is accessible it means the site's content is available, and its
functionality can be operated, by literally _anyone_. As developers, it's easy
to assume that all users can see and use a keyboard, mouse, or touch screen, and
can interact with your page the same way you do. This can lead to an experience
that works well for some people, but creates issues that range from simple
annoyances to show-stoppers for others.

## Understanding the diverse needs of users

When learning about accessibility, it helps to have an understanding of the
diverse range of users in the world and the kinds of accessibility topics that
affect them. To explain further, here's an informative video from Victor Tsaran,
a Technical Program Manager at Google, who is blind.

[![Understanding diverse user needs](https://img.youtube.com/vi/LdVlbO7_hz8/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v=LdVlbO7_hz8)

Generally speaking, accessibility concerns can be split into four broad
categories:

+  Vision
+  Motor/dexterity
+  Auditory
+  Cognitive

Planning for accessibility means thinking about users who are experiencing some
type of impairment or disability in one or more of these categories â€” and bear
in mind that that experience might be non-physical or temporary. For instance,
trying to read a screen outside during a bright, sunny day, or operating a
device one-handed while carrying a cup of coffee.

When you plan for these situations upfront, you end up with an experience that
is more robust, and works for more users regardless of their ability or
context.

### Vision

Vision impairments range from limited or low vision to complete blindness. Users
with low vision may use a combination of screen magnification, high contrast
themes, or text-to-speech to access content. Blind users may rely on a screen
reader, which is a piece of software that can navigate a page, perform actions,
and read descriptions of content and controls.

### Motor/dexterity

Motor impairment relates to anything that affects a user's ability to use a
mouse, touchscreen, or other pointing device. Users may rely on alternative
input devices to access content, such as a keyboard, head or eye tracking
software, switch devices, sip and puff devices, or voice access.

### Auditory

Auditory impairments range from hard-of-hearing to completely deaf. Users may
rely on captions or transcripts for spoken or video content.

### Cognitive

Cognitive impairment is a broad category, encompassing topics such as ADHD,
dyslexia, and autism, just to name a few. The accommodations for these users are
quite diverse, but generally speaking, users may seek to minimize distractions,
flashing, heavy animations, and anything which shifts the user's context around
the page in an unexpected way. 

## Next Steps

Now that you have a high level understanding of accessibility, and a little
experience using a screen reader, it's time to dive in to more specific details.
Take a look at the [guide to keyboard access](../keyboard-access/index.md) to get started.